==========================================
 Joe Schafer's Personal Battle Experience
==========================================

I arrived to Bagram Air Field willing to jump out of our C-130 to end
the tortorous flight.  I filed onto Bagram Air Field with the rest of
my Company, Destroyer company. We moved out to Camp Montrond, the
headquarters of Speical Operations Task Force - East, (SOTF-E).
SOTF-E was regionally aligned with RC-East and was where we were to
conduct combat operations for the next nine months.

I was the platoon leader of anti-tank platoon 4 (AT4).  Most of our
battalion was dispersed by squads and sections to the Special Forces
teams, Operational Detachment Alpha (ODA), across the whole of
Afghanistan.  Destroyer company was instead broken down by Platoon and
tasked to act as the forward logistics element providing supplies to
ODAs in our AO.  Destroyer company was the most natural fit for this
role, as we are the only motorized element in an airborne infantry
battlion.

We inprocessed for a couple of weeks at BAF, and did our relief in
place (RIP) with the existing FLE at Camp Montrond.  We moved down to
Gardez, Paktia Province and took over a small portion of FOB
Lightning.  As Destroyer company, the first order of buisiness was
renaming our spot of ground to Camp Destroyer.  Our call sign was
equally inspired; we used the call sign "strong arm".  Our call sign
chosen because the diameter our commander's and the first sergeant's
bicep exceeded most people's quads.

A week later, in July 2011, we conducted our first solo mission.  We
conducted a route reconnaissance on one of our main supply route (MSR)
to the north.  We followed an 11 truck route clearance patrol (RCP)
towards COP Herrera.  I learned that Afghan roads are like the
*Highlander*, there can be only one.  There was exactly one way to get
to each COP or VSP we resupplied, a limitation imposed by the
inhospitable terrain.  Rivers carved the only path through the
mountains, so all roads were crammed between a cliff and a river.  RCP
placed named areas of interest (NAI) on portions of the road,
indicating sections with an increased risk of an IED.  While traveling
through an NAI, the patrol would send two soldiers ahead of the convoy
to check culverts, drainage pipes underneath the road, for IEDs.  The
rationale was that the Taliban would not "waste" an IED on only a
Soldier.  Once through an NAI, everyone would mount up and we resumed
at our normal convoy speed.

Unfortunately, I learned on this first mission that just because RCP
cleared the route, it doesn't mean it is clear.  The Taliban was well
acquainted with the tactics, techniques and procedures (TTPs) of route
clearance and had compensated by switching almost exclusively to
command-wire IEDs.  About two hundred meters outside one of the NAIs,
the Taliban detonated a command wire IED on the last truck in the
convoy.  Because we were trailing the convoy, it was my platoon
sergeant's truck.  The blast blew the 25 ton RG-33 up and off the
road, into a shallow creek.  No one was injured due to the miraculous
nature of American engineering.  No one was killed due to the
initiative of my platoon sergeant

While we conducted our RIP with orignal FLE at Camp Montrond, the SF
soldiers would have a trunk monkey stand during the entire ride.
Meaning that a Soldier would stand out of the rear hatch to provide
local security.  The trunk monkey must provide local security, because
with the Commonly Remotely Operated Weapon System (CROWS), our
observations and fields of fire were greatly reduced.  However, my PSG
thought trunk monkeys were insane in an area known more for large IEDs
than for direct fire ambushes, so he ordered all his paratroopers to
sit down.  This foresight undoubtedly saved CPL Copeland's life as his
truck spiralled through the air.

The rapid evolution of TTPs is what surprised me most about my
deployment.  We diverged more and more from the original FLE as we
continued during our deployment. We used RCP as a screen, schelduing
our start time a few hours behind them instead of following
immediately after them.  We enjoyed the peace of mind that RCP
brought, but found that their convoys attracted an undue amount of
attention.  By far, however, the most effective technique was
traveling at night.  The Taliban used command-wire IEDs almost
exclusively, recognizing the effectiveness of our radio-frequency
jammers.  Like most normal beings, the enjoyed sleeping at night so
they didn't monitor their IEDs at night.  Consequently, we
transitioned to operating solely at night.  We did not suffer any
additional IEDs after that transition.

There is always an advantage to be had against an enemy.  As Sun Tzu
said in his canonical *The Art of War*, "if you know your enemies and
know yourself, you will not be imperiled in a hundred battles."
Paying close attention to and exploiting our enemy's weakness allowed
us to complete our mission without any KIAs.







