---
title: US Policy Recommendations in Somalia
author:
- name: CPT Joe Schafer
  affiliation: Team 2, Seminar 3
bibliography: Somalia.bib
date: 6 October 2014
...

The United States should assist Somalia in defeating the Al-Queda
affiliated group, Al-Shabaab, while sponsoring infrastructure
development to develop Somali youth.  The primary driver of
instability in Somalia is the excluded youth population.  The United
States should sponsor infrastructure projects to bolster health and
education development in order to integrate the youth populace into
society.  Additionally, the United States should parter with the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to maintain security.  These
actions support United States foreign policy goals by denying safe
haven to terrorist groups.  To gain a Somali perspective, I contacted
six Somalia ambassadors and ministers to ask for their recommendations
on lines of effort to support stability in Somalia.  They all declined
to respond.  As such, I will focus solely on the interests of the
United States. incidentally, serve to further goals for Somalia
proposed the United Nations in the 2012 Somali Human Development
Report.

## What Not To Do

 The United States should not attempt to further national interests
through manipulation of the Somalia economy, physical environment or
political environment.  The nascent Somali economy is fragile and
external influences might provoke unintended consequences.  The United
States should allow the Somali economy to grow naturally guided by the
invisible hand of the market.  The physical environment, especially
the untapped natural resources, should be left for future development
by Somalia, lest the United States be labeled as tyrannical.  Somalia
has become one of the few war-torn countries in recent memory to
establish a democratically elected federal republic.  Given the poor
track record of the United States in grooming international leaders,
Somalia should be left unimpeded to choose their own politicians.

## Empower the Youth

The key to stabalizing Somalia is the peaceful integration of the
youth into society through expanded infrastructure and increased
security.  Currently, Somali youth are disenfranchised due to a bleak
job market with an unemployment rate execeeding 67 percent.  The lack
of education opportunites complicates the problem of youth integration
by preventing youth from attaining the skills necessary to enter the
job market.  The poor health infrastructure compounds the problem by
exposeing a vulnerable populace to recruiting efforts from Al-Shabaab.
The United States should adopt the recommendations of the United
Nations' 2012 Somali Human Development Report, particulary by
supporting peacebuilding efforts. [@undp-12-development]  The United
States should aid Somali youth indirectly by improving health and
education infrastructure and by increasing the security by partnering
with AMISOM.  The security and infrastructure first approach follows
from Maslow's hierarchy of needs.  Before youth can ascend to
adulthood and enter the job market, Somalia must provide the
environment to satisfy basic physiological and safety needs.  The
improved security will allow Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) to
operate freely within Somalia to improve health and education
access. [@Maslo1943TheoryHuman]

![Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs](../Maslow.pdf)

## Military Partnership

The United States should partner with AMISOM to degrade and destroy
Al-Shabaab and assist in the transition into stability operations.
After the United Nations Security Council expanded the AMISOM mandate
to 22,000 personnel, AMISOM forces have experienced continuing success
against Al-Shabaab.  On 5 October, 2014, AMISOM took the Al-Shabaab's
last stronghold in the port town of Barre. [@Afric2014SomaliaNational]
To continue this success, I recommend that the United States deploy a
small task force to Somalia.  The AFRICOM regionally aligned force is
2nd Brigade, 1st Infantry Division.  The task force will parter with
the approximately division sized AMISOM force and offer insights into
stability operations.

## Infrastructure Development

The United States should improve health and education infrastructure
to secure the populace and reintegrate youth into society.  The United
States should focus on providing security to non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) as a stop-gap measure until permanent
infrastructure improvements are completed.  Médecins Sans Frontières
(MSF), known in the United States as Doctors Without Borders departed
Somalia in 2013 after several kidnappings.  The improved security
situation will coax aid groups like MSF back to Somalia.  The benefits
of improved healthcare systems in Somalia are made apparent by the
recent outbreak of Ebola.  If an outbreak can be contained in Somalia,
there is no chance it can spread to the United States.  Similarly,
improved infrastructure secures the population by increasing their
resilence to terrorist recruiting efforts.  The increased resilience
denies Al-Shabaab a base of operations to plan attacks against the
United States.  By improving health and education infrastructure, the
United States will safe guard its borders from epidemics and terrorist
attacks.

The youth are the key to Somalia.   The United States supports its
national interests by ensuring peace in Somalia for the same reason
that apply to the Middle East.

\newpage

# Bibliography

<!-- pandoc-citeproc processes citations and inserts the completed -->
<!-- text into the .tex file.  So, when using pandoc-citeproce, -->
<!-- citations are included as part of the body. To prevent -->
<!-- double-spacing our Bibliography, we need the raw latex command -->
<!-- here.  Pandoc preserves raw latex commands.  Github issue filed: -->
<!-- https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/issues/1376 -->

\RaggedRight
\setlength{\RaggedRightParindent}{1.5em}
\setlength{\parindent}{1.5em}
\setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}
\singlespacing

<!--
   \bibliography{dummy, somalia.bib}
   Local Variables:
   reftex-default-bibliography: ("somalia.bib")
   zotero-collection: #("1" 0 1 (name "Somalia"))
   reftex-cite-format: ((?\C-m . "[@%l]"))
   End:
-->
