============
 References
============

FM 3-24: Insurgencies and countering Insurgencies
=================================================

2014-06-02

Political
---------

2-16. The political variable describes the distribution of
responsibility and power at all levels of governance—formally
constituted authorities, as well as informal or covert political
powers. The counterinsurgent seeks to understand not just the formal
political system, such as political parties and elected officials, but
also the informal systems of political influence, such as ethnic
groups and other centers of power. There is a connection between the
political variable and the social variable. For example, a tribal
grouping or a social caste may directly affect whom that group sees as
a legitimate authority in an area. Moreover, these social groupings
can affect the formal power structure. For example, in an electoral
system, groups will often vote as blocs, giving them added political
power in that formal system. (See ADRP 5-0 for more information on the
political variable.)

2-17. Often, informal groups such as tribes or local councils are the
essential actors in the distribution of political power, especially at
the local level. Political power is the ability to influence
behavior. The biggest influence of behavior is often local groupings
that can create a norming effect on a population. Most groups hold
power only because the population accepts that power distribution.

2-18. However, the opposite can also be true and the formal political
system can change group identity and influence the actions of any
social group. States can create identity in a population through
education and information. For example, an education program that
instills nationalist views in an individual from an early age can be a
powerful tool in shaping a person’s identity and in turn whom that
person sees as a legitimate authority. Group and individual identities
are not static, nor is whom a population views as legitimate
static. While groups have internal means to view identity, variables
outside the group, including the host nation, also affect them.

2-19. The commitment and motivation of a host nation to defeat an
insurgency is an important motivation.  Governments with more than one
of the following traits have tended to lose historically, even when
supported by competent and committed external forces:

* Government sponsors or protects unpopular economic and social
  arrangements or cultural institutions.
* Government is involved in corrupt and arbitrary personalistic rule.
* Government operates as a kleptocracy.
* Government is controlled by elites with perverse incentives to
  continue conflict.
* Government is economically dependent on external actors.

The harsh reality for counterinsurgents is that some of these negative
characteristics are usually present, and they are key factors in
sparking insurgencies in the first place. As a result, the interests
of a host-nation government are often at odds with what the best
practices would be to solve its political problems. (See paragraphs
1-27 through 1-33 for more information on legitimacy and control.)

Military
--------

2-20. The military variable explores the military and paramilitary
capabilities of all relevant actors (enemy, friendly, and neutral) in
a given operational environment. For many countries, the army’s
predominant purpose is to be the military force responsible for
maintaining external security. However, this is not a universal rule,
and many militaries become involved in internal security and even
governance. In some cases, there is a degree of military control over
the government, which then blends the political and military
variables. This can range from a military dictatorship to a praetorian
guard type military that periodically intervenes in the governance of
a society. Even in cases where a host nation appears to have complete
objective control over its military forces, these military forces can
be an important bureaucratic and political actor. The interaction
between the military and the political structure is important to
understanding this variable’s relationship with the political
distribution of power in a society. (See ADRP 5-0 for more information
on the military variable.)

2-21. A host of institutions including police, paramilitary,
intelligence, and other organizations can maintain internal
security. Thus, commanders and staffs need to consider them within the
military variable.  In many autocratic societies, intelligence
agencies provide an essential means of control over a society.  Many
societies maintain civil control and civil security by an accepted
rule of law and a police force that enforces the rule of law. In a
counterinsurgency, the host nation may use the military or a
paramilitary to defeat an insurgency.

2-22. The military variable includes all forces involved in both
internal and external security. U.S. counterinsurgents must fully
understand how the host nation maintains internal and external
security.  Moreover, they must understand both neutral and enemy
military forces. Neutral military forces are common in a
counterinsurgency, as some states or multinational corporations will
employ or contract for limited forces to protect personnel, resources,
or infrastructure for their own interests. A peacekeeping force may be
maintaining a position of neutrality in the conflict. There can also
be informal groupings of military power. For example, local gangs,
armed militias, and private security agents can be a factor in local
areas.

2-23. Commanders and staffs should analyze friendly, neutral, and
enemy forces with both qualitative and quantitative data. Some aspects
to consider include—

* Position of forces in national and local governmental structure.
* General organization, training, and doctrine.
* Economic basis (to include the appropriations system).
* Conscription or recruitment systems.
* Police role in the nation’s internal security.
* Rapport with population.
* The impact of other international forces already there or there in
   the recent past.

These considerations are particularly important with regard to the
insurgents. Knowing from what groups and sources, both within the
country of conflict and outside of it, are providing what kinds of
support (for example, financial, personnel, materiel, and provisions)
and by what processes or routes is critical.  Insurgencies that
continue to meet their tangible support needs are difficult to defeat.

2-24. One enemy force in a counterinsurgency can vary widely from
another. Some may be based on cellular organizations while others may
be more hierarchical. Moreover, there may be a wide variance in enemy
capabilities. Some insurgencies may have capabilities to conduct large
scale and well coordinated attacks that may rival the capability of a
host nation’s military. Others may have less capability and may rely
on small-unit tactics. (See paragraphs 4-76 through 4-103 for a
discussion of the eighth dynamic, organizational and operational
patterns, and see chapter 5 for a further discussion on enemy military
forces.)

Economic
--------

2-25. The economic variable encompasses individual and group behaviors
related to gaining access to, producing, distributing, and consuming
resources. These behaviors determine incentives and disincentives that
encourage or discourage economic decisions. The sum of these
individual and group decisions may determine the production,
distribution, and consumption of economic resources. Typically, an
economy is conceptualized as currency, stocks, major commodities,
banking, and trade controlled and monitored by the
government. However, informal economies, trade, or economic exchange
outside state-controlled or money-based transactions may be of equal
or greater importance than formal economies in understanding an
operational environment. While the world economy continues to grow
more interdependent, local economies remain relatively distinct. These
differences significantly influence political choices, including
individuals’ decisions to support or subvert the existing order. When
commanders and staffs analyze a local economy, they consider both
governmental policies and the type of local economy.

2-26. Types of economies vary widely. When looking at economic
activities, commanders and staffs strive to understand the relative
importance of the various sectors of an economy. Comparing the
percentage of the economy in the public sector versus the private
sector provides some understanding of the structure of the
economy. Moreover, the private and public sector can potentially be
divided into different sectors based on type of
activities. Agriculture, raw materials, services, and other types of
production play an important role in defining the economy of a local
area. It is important to analyze governmental policies. Corruption,
the rule of law, and macroeconomic policy play a role in the structure
of a local economy.

2-27. Another important factor in analyzing economic activity is the
informal economy. In weak states, understanding the informal economy
is key to providing a full understanding of an operational
environment. The informal economy is those economic interactions and
exchanges that are not recognized, regulated, controlled, or taxed by
a state government. In this case, informal does not always equal
illegitimate. For example, a black market is a form of informal
economy based on criminal activities such as racketeering, money
laundering, prostitution, drug trafficking, and smuggling. On the
other hand, open-air markets and barter systems are legitimate
activities that often contribute to an informal economy.  In every
country there is a balance between formal and informal economies. In
successful states, the informal economy may be relatively
small. However, in failing states the informal economy may form the
majority of all economic activities. The local population may depend
on informal markets for their most basic needs. It is difficult but
important for counterinsurgents to develop an understanding of these
informal economies (both legitimate and illegitimate.) Because they
are outside host-nation government oversight, insurgents can exploit
even legitimate formal economies as a source of funding. The black
market, on the other hand, will most likely be a direct enabler of an
insurgency in terms of both funding and logistics.

2-28. The counterinsurgent must consider other informal
economies. Most people work, buy, and sell in this economy, operating
outside legal frameworks but not engaging in illicit or criminal
activity (except perhaps for taxation issues). Sensitivity to the
rules of an informal economy is one piece of cultural sensitivity to
the population and the host nation in general. Examples of the rules
of an informal economy include the following:

* People earn income in non-cash payments such as benefits or goods.
* People often use land for decades (or more) through traditional
usage rights granted by village heads and chiefs with no legal title.
* People may work without pay (in arrangements such as the traditional
divisions of household and farm labor).

2-29. Economic variables also tie into other elements of a
society. For example, ownership or control of land and debt indicate
something about the power structure within a society. Many developing
societies have highly concentrated ownership of land, which can serve
as a driver for social conflict and discontent.  Whoever owns land or
controls land has the power to use it for economic profit. Maintaining
this ownership or control during an insurgency indicates a degree of
power in a society. The same is true of debt. The ability to collect a
debt indicates a degree of power in a society. Land and debt are
examples of how economic factors link into other social factors.

2-30. If a population views economic conditions as unjust, a lack of
economic opportunity can be a root cause of an insurgency. (See
paragraphs 4-14 through 4-22 for more information on motives for an
insurgency.) As part of developing an understanding of an operational
environment, counterinsurgents assess the current economic variables,
the economic opportunities available to different segments of the
population, and the effect insurgent and counterinsurgent operations
are having on the population’s ability to meet their most basic
economic needs. Economic survival, especially in an area where an
insurgency is occurring, is almost as important and as immediate a
challenge for households as physical security. For this reason,
leaders at all levels of the counterinsurgency operation (including
platoons and companies) need to assess the impacts of military
operations on the following simple elements of the economic welfare of
households and communities:

* Income (including the capacity to earn streams of income in future).
* Assets and property (used to earn income).
* Work (including traditional patterns of unpaid work).

2-31. Commanders strive to understand the economic impact of the
unit’s presence in an area. For better or worse, the presence of an
Army or Marine Corps unit affects normal economic incentives and
disincentives for individual behavior. Introducing foreign wealth can
have unintended negative consequences. For this reason, careful
thought and planning are needed for a project intended to have local
economic impact.  Commanders anticipate the economic impact of their
arrival and their continued presence in the area of
operations. Additionally, commanders and staffs carefully weigh the
costs and benefits associated with all economic activity. Some factors
to consider are—

* Prospects of long-term sustainability.
* Possibility of local price inflation.
* Disrupting natural incentives (such as farmers leaving fields to
   work on trash pickup projects).

Social
------

2-32. The social variable describes the cultural, religious, and
ethnic makeup within an operational environment and the beliefs,
values, customs, and behaviors of society. Understanding the society
is foundational to understanding the social variable. A society is
defined as a population whose members are subject to the same
political authority, occupy a common territory, have a common culture,
and share a sense of identity. However, no society is completely
homogeneous. A society usually has a dominant culture, but it can have
secondary cultures. Different societies may share similar cultures, as
Canada and the U.S. do. Societies are not static, but change over
time. (For more information on this variable, see chapter 3 of this
publication and ADRP 5-0.)

Information
-----------

2-33. The information variable describes the nature, scope,
characteristics, and effects of individuals, organizations, and
systems that collect, process, disseminate, or act on information. The
information environment is the aggregate of individuals,
organizations, and systems that collect, process, disseminate, or act
on information (JP 3-13). Understanding the communications systems is
important because they influence international, national, regional,
and local audiences. Insurgents often use information and
disinformation to gain credibility and legitimacy with the population,
while simultaneously undermining their opponents. Understanding how
people communicate and who influences them on a daily basis is
essential. This is important at all levels. For example, identifying
local gathering places is important to understand or influence the
spread of information, rumors, and gossip.

2-34. The information environment is made up of three dimensions:
physical, informational, and cognitive.  The cognitive dimension
encompasses the mind of the decisionmaker or specific audience and is
the dimension where people think, perceive, visualize, and decide. The
informational dimension is the place where information is collected,
processed, stored, disseminated, displayed, and protected with key
components of the content and flow of information. The physical
dimension is composed of systems, human beings (including
decisionmakers, leaders, and military forces), and supporting
infrastructure that enable individuals and organizations to create
effects conduct operations across air, land, maritime, space and
cyberspace domains across multiple domains. (See table 2-1.)

2-35. The technological advances in communications offer some unique
considerations for insurgencies.  For one, international communication
is easier than it used to be. This allows insurgencies to communicate
with organizations outside of their physical control. Connecting to
diasporas or sympathetic groups could be vital to an insurgency. With
the ability to communicate comes the ability to move resources and
funding.  Moreover, communications can be vital in importing weapons
or other supplies to an insurgency. Global communications can be
essential in increasing the military capabilities of an insurgency,
significantly increasing the tempo of insurgent operations and their
ability to change tactics.

2-36. At the operational and tactical level, communications allow for
effective coordination of attacks.  Organizations can communicate by
cell phones, by the internet, or a number of other rapid means. This
allows for coordinated large-scale attacks even by dispersed
organizations. (For additional information on the information
environment, see FM 3-13.)

Infrastructure
--------------

2-37. The infrastructure variable is composed of the facilities
(buildings and equipment), personnel, and services needed for the
functioning of a community or society. Societies have different
infrastructure needs.  For example, the expectation for hours of
available electricity vary widely. Counterinsurgents try to access
infrastructure needs to meet the expectation of the user, not their
own expectations.

2-38. Infrastructure is also interrelated with other variables. For
example, the development of a highway system will affect the ability
of people to move and interact with others. Creating a society in
which humans can easily move based on economic needs or simple desires
greatly increases the variety of groups a person will meet. These
interactions and new relationships can change how a person views the
world and change that person’s values. A communications system, such
as a cellular network, can have the same effect. These systems allow
for communications outside of one’s areas and allow the transmission
of new ideas and concepts.

2-39. Commanders and staffs conducting counterinsurgency operations
must consider the relationship between infrastructure and the economic
variable. An effective infrastructure can allow for the easy movement
of people, goods, and ideas. Many businesses require
infrastructure. While it is true that a local population may not
expect 24 hours of electricity a day, a manufacturing plant may
require it. Moreover, infrastructure such as schools can increase the
human capital in an area and drive economic growth.

2-40. Infrastructure also has an effect on the military
variable. Host-nation forces can use a good transportation system, but
so can an insurgency. A road system provides a means of transportation
for everyone, not simply the population and government. Moreover,
infrastructure may be important for the population and the
government’s role in maintaining civil control and security. An attack
on the infrastructure may undermine the government’s legitimacy in an
area. However, the opposite is also true.  An attack on infrastructure
may also undermine the insurgency if the population places blame on
the insurgency and turns towards to government.

Physical Environment
--------------------

2-41. The physical environment includes the geography and man-made
structures, as well as the climate and weather, in an area of
operations. The physical environment affects the tactics and
operations of both insurgents and counterinsurgents. Extreme
conditions, such as in nations in higher elevations, can make
insurgent movements difficult in the winter. The movement and the
tactics of any military force will be affected by the physical
environment of its area of operations. A physical environment will
influence insurgency sanctuaries, the ability of an insurgency to hide
resources, and the ability of an insurgency to mass
forces. Understanding a physical environment is essential to
understanding an insurgency. (See chapter 4 for further discussion on
how a physical environment relates to an insurgency.)

2-42. A physical environment also relates to the other variables. A
mountainous, landlocked country will have a difficult time building
the infrastructure needed for large-scale international
trade. Moreover, if the physical environment precludes the ability to
easily produce an excess of food, it is difficult to divert much labor
to other enterprises. This can hamper the development of a highly
specialized economy. An increase in food production will often predate
a major increase in industrial production.

Time
----

2-43. Time describes the timing and duration of activities, events, or
conditions within an operational environment, as well as how various
actors in an operational environment perceive the timing and duration.
Time also has an interrelated relationship with other variables. For
example, a multinational coalition may see its efforts in a
counterinsurgency as limited by national objectives or by the public
pressure. In other words, outside parties can always leave a
counterinsurgency. On the other hand, for the host nation, the
insurgents and the population in the struggle are less constrained by
time than a multinational coalition. An insurgency may use the time
variable to its advantage, while the time variable usually works
against an external counterinsurgent.

2-44. Time can also play a role in the social variable. Ongoing
conflicts tax societies. Populations can become less interested in the
nuisance of a conflict and more interested in simple peace. As time
passes, a population may be more interested in who is likely to win an
insurgency than the motivation of either side of the
conflict. Counterinsurgents may also see time as working for or
against them. (See paragraphs 4-30 through 4-45 for more information
on insurgent strategies.)


To Explore
----------

TRADOC Culture Center




The World's Most Dangerous Place: Inside the Outlaw State of Somalia
--------------------------------------------------------------------
James Fergusson

The newcomer, a moderate Islamist with links to the Muslim
Brotherhood, is admired for his perceived lack of corruption as well
as for the fact that, unlike most educated Somalis, he did not flee
Mogadishu during the civil war. His election was against all
expectations. The incumbent, President Sheikh Sharif, was rumoured to
have many supporters in the Gulf who had reportedly spent $7m in
bribes in a bid to secure his re-election.1 It was the first genuine
presidential poll in a generation, representing what the UN Special
Envoy Augustine Mahiga called ‘an unprecedented opportunity for
peace’.  LOCATION: 114

First, the gains of 2011–12 are all perilously fragile, and could
easily be reversed. The process of political reform was flawed from
the start, with even the UN admitting that the clan elders had rigged
the selection of the new parliament through bribery, intimidation and
violence: a dispiriting case of plus ça change, in other words.
LOCATION: 125

The second reason is that Somalia’s underlying problems have still not
been dealt with, and chief among these, I would argue, is the question
of what to do with the country’s millions of young men.  LOCATION: 135

‘The US does not have a robust and comprehensive strategy for
targeting the connection between youth and conflict,’ Professor
Jennifer Sciubba, a demographer and adviser to the US Department of
Defence, said recently. ‘Victory, in whatever form, will remain
elusive as long as this segment of the population is marginalized.’2
LOCATION: 137

The TFG is Somalia’s Transitional Federal Government, whose forces are
supposed to be leading this war. Mugarura and the 9,000 other mostly
Ugandan ‘peace enforcers’ who make up AMISOM, the UN-mandated African
Union Mission in Somalia, are officially only here in a supporting
role. The truth, of course, is that the foreigners are running the
offensive – AMISOM versus Islamisom, as the local joke goes – because
the TFG’s ‘army’ is actually an uncertain alliance of clan militias
incapable of leading anything much. There have been stories of TFG
troops deserting their posts, and of shooting at each other instead of
at al-Shabaab. They are even suspected of selling the enemy their
weapons and ammunition.  LOCATION: 230

He is not exaggerating. AMISOM’s casualty rates are proportionally
worse than anything experienced by Nato in Afghanistan. Over eight
hundred of their soldiers have been killed since they first deployed
in 2007, the severest test ever faced by the nine-year-old, 54-nation
African Union which, as the continent’s answer to the EU, sanctioned
the AMISOM mission.  LOCATION: 265

Despite this, America remains almost pathologically afraid of ‘another
Black Hawk Down’, a fear that has governed its thinking on the Horn of
Africa ever since. ‘The United States does not plan, does not direct,
and does not coordinate the military operations of the TFG, and we
have not and will not be providing direct support for any potential
military offensives,’ insisted Johnnie Carson, the State Department’s
secretary for African affairs, in a speech in March 2010. ‘Further, we
are not providing nor paying for military advisors for the TFG. There
is no desire to Americanize the conflict in Somalia.’3 Paying for
military advisors to AMISOM, however, was apparently a different
matter. Black Hawk Down was the reason the Bancroft Hotel LOCATION:
429

It occurred to me that Museveni might understand, better than his
critics, how much Uganda had to lose from the growth of Islamic
extremism in the Horn. There are Muslim communities in every
sub-Saharan country between Somalia and Mauritania, many of whom live
as minorities with legitimate social grievances. AQIM, al-Qaida In the
Maghreb, was active in Algeria, Mauritania and Niger. Ansar Dine, a
militant Tuareg group thought to be linked to AQIM, was taking control
of northern Mali. Another group, Boko Haram – ‘Books Forbidden’ or
‘Western education is sinful’– was already terrorizing swathes of
northern Nigeria. Did Museveni worry that such Islamist groups could
link up in the future, and that Islamism, if left unchecked, could
topple his country like a domino? He was not alone, if so.  LOCATION:
552

Medicine’s power to impress the locals was quickly demonstrated when
al-Shabaab announced on the radio that anyone obtaining or even
seeking treatment from the infidels would be considered
‘unclean’. When this admonition was ignored, an edict was passed
warning that anyone found in possession of an AMISOM medical form
risked having their tongue cut out. The militants also occasionally
tried to mortar the OPD. And yet by ten o’clock on the morning I
visited, the open-sided shed lined with crude wooden benches that
served as a reception area was already full to bursting. Al-Shabaab’s
threats, or the risk of a lucky mortar strike, were no deterrent at
all.  LOCATION: 630

In 2011, according to the World Health Organization, nearly half of
Somali victims of weapons-related injuries were children under the age
of five. An entire generation of Somalis had grown up knowing that
they could be violently killed, at random, at any time. Fatalism of
the deepest, darkest kind was inevitable in such a place – and who
knew what long-term effect that might have on a person’s mental
well-being?  LOCATION: 650

Somali society, though, had learned over the centuries to control the
violence through the application of xeer, an ancient and highly
developed system of customary law traditionally administered by the
elders of the rival clans, who would sit down and negotiate a
compromise in the event of major disputes. Somalia’s real troubles
began in the late 1970s when Siad Barre began to exploit and
exacerbate the old clan rivalries in order to maintain his grip on
power – a classic instance of divide and rule – while simultaneously
running down the xeer system in favour of scientific socialism. The
old social contract was then further destroyed by years of terrible
civil war.  LOCATION: 722

I think it was Roosevelt who said that the security of a nation
depends on ammunition in the short term, but that it is the economy
that counts in the long run.’ LOCATION: 774

I wasn’t the only one forced to shelter from the metal storm. First
came the Minister of Information, Abdulkareem Jama, a clean-cut,
bespectacled man with a strong American accent. He turned out to be
from Falls Church, Virginia, and used to work as an IT manager for a
small commercial publishing firm in Washington. Next to arrive was
Mohamed Nur, the speckle-bearded mayor of Mogadishu, a returnee from
north London.  LOCATION: 1312

a notorious warlord called Mohamed Dheere, arrived in two armed trucks
and opened fire. Four people were killed and sixteen wounded. ‘Dheere
is just a thug – a cold man,’ Nur said bitterly. ‘He wants chaos – and
he might even get away with it yet.’ Dheere, he explained, had been
arrested and imprisoned, and was supposed to be tried by a military
court for the attack, but the trial had been deferred following
pressure through his Hawiye Abgaal clan. ‘My impression is that when
someone invokes clan loyalty, they are very often working not in that
clan’s interests but in their own . . . Dheere has been given special
treatment in his cell. He even hired the chief prosecutor’s office to
defend him! How is that possible? Don’t talk to me about an
independent judiciary. There is none here.’ LOCATION: 1342

The Taliban put great importance on getting their message across to an
international audience, and were prepared to take considerable risks
to do so. They understood that the continuation of Nato’s war depended
on Western public approval ratings, and that the foreign media offered
them their best opportunity to undermine these. Al-Shabaab, by
contrast, usually just wanted to shoot the messenger. Their common
assumption, almost a default position, was that all journalists – even
local ones – were traitors and spies. Al-Shabaab knew, or thought they
knew, that AMISOM had access to CIA surveillance technology, and were
paranoid about being traced. This meant that there was no phone number
a journalist could call to request an interview, no email address to
write to, and of course no physical office to visit.  LOCATION: 1537

illiteracy rate of over 60 per cent.  LOCATION: 1613

Later that summer, in Puntland, I met a French criminologist called
Daniel LaDouceur, an expert in youth gang culture who knew this
deserters’ camp well. Gang membership, he explained, was a primitive
survival tactic based on strength in numbers. With the collapse of
central authority in 1991 and the breakdown of the clan system, Somali
society had disintegrated further into a constellation of gangs, the
continuing survival of which, he thought, presented the single
greatest obstruction to Somalia’s civil reconstruction.  LOCATION:
1765

LaDouceur was piloting a UN-funded scheme called ‘Youth at Risk’ which
aimed to take potential gangsters off the street by paying them to
take lessons in citizenship, governance and the rule of law.
LOCATION: 1772

Jeffrey Gettleman, New York Times, 10 August 2011, ‘US Relies on
Contractors in Somalia Conflict’ LOCATION: 5560
