---
title: Stability in Somalia
author:
- name: CPT Joe Schafer
  affiliation: Team 2, Seminar 6
bibliography: somalia.bib
date: 30 June 2014
...

<!--
TODO:
  * scale parens around small caps
  * kerning of small caps after quotes
-->

Stability and Somalia are words not often found in close proximity.
Somalia ranked first on the list of the most failed states from
2008â€“2013 and currently ranks second.  [@failed-states-14] Due to the
volatility from two decades of civil war, any semblance of stability
Somalia is emergent rather than established.  The political, military
and the physical environments are the emergent drivers of stability in
Somalia.  The political environment stabilizes Somalia by providing a
unified and internationally recognized government.  The military
stabilizes Somalia by providing consistent security under the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and by slowly defeating the
corrupting influence of the terrorist group al-Shabaab.  The physical
environment stabilizes Somalia by attracting foreign investment in
return for access to abundant natural resources and because of its
strategic location along a major oil maritime transit route.


<!-- Politics -->

Political stability was achieved after two decades of continuous
conflict and political change.  Though the newly established Federal
Republic of Somalia leads the world in corporate and political
corruption, the acceptance of the new government onto the world stage
indicates that political stability will endure.
[@transparency-13-corruption] With the ratification of the
constitution in 2012, key international organizations, including the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank recognized Somalia's
nascent government.  Additionally, several countries formally reopened
diplomatic channels with Somalia, to include the United
States. [@adan-13-new-african]

Despite recent gains, there are substantial barriers to a unified
Somalia.  Political stability is still developing and is and not yet
assured.  Somalia, the nation-state, is a loose concept that varies by
region throughout the country.  Somaliland and Puntland are
semi-autonomous regions that govern their own affairs. Additionally,
the political process has not yet reached the level of decorum
expected in a modern state. Fistfights frequently occur in the
parliament, occasionally escalating to full brawls. In the last brawl,
four representatives were admitted to the hospital with head
injuries. [@heaton-12-somalia] The US House of Representatives
demonstrated similar behavior in 1858, igniting a melee in which over
30 representatives engaged in close quarters
battle.[@ushouse-14-brawl] As with the US House of Representatives in
1858, the Somali political process is rebuilding after a devastating
civil war.

The recent presidential election highlights the advances of the
political processes.  A university professor, Hassan Sheik Mohamud,
ousted the incumbent Sheikh Sharif, despite the fact that Sharif spent
a reported $7 million in bribes to rig the election.
[@fergusson-13-outlaw Location 114] Shortly after securing the
presidency, Mohamud was named to the *Time 100: Most Influential
People in the World 2013* for his contributions against corruption and
his role in stabilizing the war torn Somalia. [@kagame-13-time]
President Mohamud's success was greatly eased by al-Shabaab publicity
missteps.  Al-Shabaab is a destabilizing influence focused on creating
an "Islamist state in Somalia, administered according to its radical
interpretation of sharia (Islamic law)."  [@janes-14-shabaab] Instead
of communicating their message to an international audience,
al-Shabaab refused to talk to all journalists, assuming that all
journalists were spies. [@fergusson-13-outlaw, Location 1537]
Al-Shabaab's inability to overcome their rigid ideology and spread
their message undermines their support amongst the populace and
creates space for the growth of the government.  The continued, stable
progression of the Somali political process depends heavily on
al-Shabaab publicity missteps and on the security afforded by the
military.  The current relative peace afforded by the situation offers
Somalia the best chance for a stable, lasting government since its
descent into civil war in 1991.

<!-- Military -->

The Somali military by itself is not a driver of stability due to clan
infighting and low levels of readiness.  However, the recent
transnational operations under the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) markedly increased the internal security of Somalia,
subsequently increasing stability. AMISOM is mandated by the African
Union to "conduct Peace Support Operations in Somalia to stabilize the
situation in the country in order to create conditions for the conduct
of Humanitarian activities and an immediate take over by the United
Nations."  [@amisom-13-mandate] AMISOM consists of military personnel
and police forces from Uganda, Burundi, Djibouti, Sierra Leone, and
Kenya. AMISOM, with a 22,000 strong force, drove al-Shabaab from
Mogadishu and out of the Kismayo Port, simultaneously eliminating a
valuable source of income for al-Shabaab and providing legitimacy to
the government.

As with the government, the newly formed Somali Army is not yet a
driver of stability.  Rather, the Army provides a path to stability by
learning from its partner nation's forces under AMISOM.  The external
nations in AMISOM bear the brunt of battle, due to the infighting in
the Somali Army.  According to Fergusson, the Somalia Army is rife
with desertion, fratricide and treason.
[@fergusson-13-outlaw, Location 230] The Somali Army infighting is
compounded by pay problems. In one case the military went without pay
for six months. [@janes-14-somali-army] The Somali government's
consistent inability to fund their military degrades the readiness of
their force to the point of incompetence.  Subsequently, trust in the
Somalia Army is nonexistent, perhaps best underscored by precautions
taken at a recent presidential review.  Before the ceremony, all
soldiers were disarmed and conducted the parade without weapons,
highlighting the President's complete lack of confidence in the
Army. [@janes-14-somali-army]

Despite the difference in proficiency between members of AMISOM, other
African Union countries have a vested interest in the stability of
Somalia.  The rise of terrorist organizations in Africa continues at a
rapid rate.  Both al-Queda In the Maghreb and Boko Haram both operate
on the continent and are allied with al-Shabaab. Part of the AMISOM
mission is an attempt to stem the flow of extreme Islamist ideology
into Africa.  As a survival mechanism, Somali's often ally with
terrorist groups choosing to side with the most powerful local force.
The Somalia people are ruthlessly pragmatic after 20 years of war,
eschewing dogma for survival.  A civilian adviser working with AMISOM
noted, "a lot of people [...] are pretending to be part of
[al-Shabaab's] religious lifestyle so they can be accepted."
[@heaton-12-somalia] As al-Shabaab yields space to the AMISOM
offensive, the people have slowly pledged support for Somalia. In
addition to military support, AMISOM provided health-care services
quickly curried favor amongst locals.  Despite notices from al-Shabaab
threatening the removal of participant's tongues for utilizing the
health-care services, Somalis continued to visit the clinics, often
traveling distances in excess of 20 kilometers.
[@fergusson-13-outlaw, Location 630]

AMISOM has proven capable of defeating al-Shabaab and regaining lost
territory.  As AMISOM advances, the legitimacy of the Somali
government grows, and with it, the support of the populace.  As long
as the AMISOM charter is renewed every six months, Somali's partner
forces will continue to drive stability.

<!-- Physical Environment -->

Somalia's physical environment stabilizes the region by attracting
foreign investment for access to abundant natural resources and oil
deposits.  Foreign investment spurs economic growth and increases
stability.  Additionally, Somalia's strategic location along
approaches to Bab el Mandeb and routes through the Red Sea and Suez
Canal are vital to world shipping.  [@cia-14-somalia]

The economic future of Somalia is speculative, but hopeful.  Somalia
is still an agricultural society.  Agriculture contributes 59% of the
GDP and employs 71% of the workforce.[@cia-14-somalia] However,
Somalia ranks in the bottom 15% of countries for arable land; only
1.7% of total land was surveyed as arable.  [@worldbank-2011-arable]
The future of Somalia lies not in agriculture, but in oil.  Fergusson
notes that "Somalia possesses important [oil] reserves, both in the
north of the country and to the south off the shore of Kismayo. With
al-Shabaab in retreat, the more adventurous prospecting companies are
already circling, bringing the promise of massive foreign investment
and, eventually, Gulf-style oil wealth to this impoverished nation."
[@fergusson-13-independent] Additionally, Somalia lies along the Bab
el-Mandeb strait, a strategic location that offer a maritime route
between Mediterranean Sea and Indian Ocean.  In 2011, 3.4 million
barrels of oil per day traveled through Bab el-Mandeb, representing
approximately 10% of all oil transported through oil transit
chokepoints. [@energy-12-chokepoint]  The strategic importance of the
maritime route ensures the key international actors are invested in
the stability of Somalia.

Somalia's political, military, and physical environments are
interdependent. An increase in one factor will drive an increase in
another.  As AMISOM maintains security and defeats al-Shabaab, the
political legitimacy of Somalia increases.  As the political
environment stabilizes, foreign investment in the physical environment
spurs economic growth.  Conversely, Somalia could easily slide back
into to civil war if al-Shabaab launches a successful
counter-offensive, or if the government collapses due to clan
political maneuvering.  The delicate balance between the political
environment, the military and the physical environment offers Somalia
the opportunity to rise from civil war into a major power on the
African continent.

\newpage

Bibliography
------------

<!-- pandoc-citeproc processes citations and inserts the completed -->
<!-- text into the .tex file.  So, when using pandoc-citeproce, -->
<!-- citations are included as part of the body. To prevent -->
<!-- double-spacing our Bibliography, we need the raw latex command -->
<!-- here.  Pandoc preserves raw latex commands.  Github issue filed: -->
<!-- https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/issues/1376 -->

\singlespacing

<!--
   \bibliography{dummy, somalia.bib}
   Local Variables:
   reftex-default-bibliography: ("somalia.bib")
   zotero-collection: #("1" 0 1 (name "Somalia"))
   reftex-cite-format: ((?\C-m . "[@%l]"))
   End:
-->
