======================
 Stability in Somalia
======================

The three drivers of stability in Somalia are Political, Military and
the physical environment.  The political environment is a driver of
stability because the Somalia finally established a central government
after 14 years.  The military is a driver of stability because AMISOM
has handily defeated Al-Shabab and secured the public trust in the
military.  The physical environment is a driver of stability because
Somalia possesses rich natural resources and a strategic location in
the horn of Africa.

Stability and Somalia are words not often paired together.  Somalia
topped the Failed States Index for the previous three years, and
finished in the top 1- for the last XX years.  With a checkered
history, drivers of stability in Somalia must be viewed as fledgling
drivers of stability, not Michael Schumaker.

Politics
========

Political stability was achieved after a long 14 years of constant
conflict and regime changes.  Though the newly formed XX govt of
Somalia leads the world in corruption, and is more correctly defined
as a Kleptocracy, signs indicate that politics in Somalia are on the
rise.  Key international organizations recognized Somali as a
nation-state including the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the
World Bank.  Key nation-states formally reopened diplomatic channels
with Somalia, to include the United States.  That said, there are
serious hindrances to a unified Somalia.  Somalia, the nation-state,
is a loose concept that varies in the regions throughout the concept.
Somaliland and Puntland are semi-autonomous regions that ignore the
whims of the central government.  Additionally, the political process
has not yet reached the level of decorum expected in a modern state.

Fistfights frequently occured in the TFG Parliment parliament,
ocassionaly escalating to full brawls.  [@heaton_somalias_2012]  The
U.S. House of Representatives demonstrated similar behaviour in 1858,
in which over 30 members engaged in hand-to-hand combat. [@history_art_&_archives_u.s._house_of_representatives_most_2014]

Nevertheless, the Somali blend of governance seems to work
and it matches the country that made it.  At least we're not
overthrowing their shah.  Member of the African Union.

Military
========

The Somalia military is not such much the driver of stability, but the
recent trans-national operations under AMISOM greatly contributed to
the internal security of Somalia.

"The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is mandated to conduct
Peace Support Operations in Somalia to stabilize the situation in the
country in order to create conditions for the conduct of Humanitarian
activities and an immediate take over by the United Nations (UN)."
[@amisom_amisom_2013]

Under the 22,000 strong force, AMISOM drove Al-Shabab from Mogadishu
and XXXX.

Al-Shabaab, (the Mujahideen Youth Movement) is a terrorist
organization under the umbrella of Al-Queda. "Al-Shabaab's primary
objective is the creation of an Islamist state in Somalia,
administered according to its radical interpretation of sharia
(Islamic law)."  [@ihs_janes_harakat_2014]

The Somalia people are ruthlessly pragmatic after 20 years of war,
eschewing dogma for survival.  A civilian advisor working with AMISOM
noted, "a lot of people I know who don't even pray are pretending to
be part of that religious lifestyle so they can be accepted."
[@heaton_somalias_2012]

The people noticed the winning record of AMISOM and have given their
support.  The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) consists of
Uganda, Burundian, Djibouti, Sierra Leone, and Kenya.


The Somalia Army in and of itself lacks the capability to counter
insurgencies.  Frequent pay problems plague the military. In one case
the military went without pay for six months. [@ihs_janes_world_2014]
Additionally, the Army's lack of ability to pay Soldier consistently
leads to the decrease lethality and efficiency of the force.  The
level of trust in the Somalia Army is perhaps best explained by their
SOP for presidential review.  Soldier were disarmed for presidential
election. [@ihs_janes_world_2014] That said, AMISOM has proven
capability of defeating Al-Shabab and regaining territory.  As long as
AMISOM exists, the Somali Army will continue to drive stability.

Physical Environment
====================

The physical environment is a driver of stability because of the
richness of natural resources and likelihood of oil within Somalia.  It
has the longest coastline in the the Africa.  The strategic location
along approaches to Bab el Mandeb and the routes through the red Sea
and Suez canal are vital to world shipping.


..
   \bibliography{dummy, somalia.bib}

   Local Variables:
   reftex-default-bibliography: ("somalia.bib")
   zotero-collection: #("1" 0 1 (name "Somalia"))
   reftex-cite-format: ((?\C-m . "[@%l]"))
   End:
