---
title: Unfortunate Foray into Hammelburg
author:
- name: CPT Joe Schafer
  affiliation: Team 2, Seminar 3
bibliography: hammelburg.bib
date: 2014-08-21
...

<!--
TODO:
  * scale parenthesis around small caps
  * kerning of small caps after quotes
-->

TF Baum failed to liberate prisoners from Oflag XII-B in the
Hammelburg raid because the mission violated the characteristics of
the offense, namely concentration and tempo.  The principle of
concentration was violated because...  The principle of tempo was
violated because an unfocused mission did not narrow the scope of
Baum's mission.

As Patton liberated Bastogne, his 3rd Army contined the attack north,
crossing Rhine and entering the end game for WWII.  See Annex 1 for an
overview of forces.  During this push, Patton was within 60 miles of
Oflag XII-B, a German prison camp for offices.  Intelligence from the
Red Army indicated that a large group of prisoners was recently
transferedd from TODO to Oflag XII-B.  Among the group of prisoners
was rumored to be John Waters, Patton's son-in-law.  Patton wrote to
his wife?, saying he was "close to John" and had to give it a college
try.

Among Patton's divisions, the 4th Armored Division ranked as Patton's
favorite.  Patton gave the mission to Hoge, who protested at the
constraints imposed by Patton.  Patton, taking GEN Bradley's guidance,
insisted that no more than 300 men take part in the operation.  Hoge
assigned the mission to LTC Creighton Abrams and his Combat Command B
which is equivalent to a combined arms brigade.  Abrams assigned the
mission to TODO?.  Unfortunately, LTC fuck face had a fierce case of
hemoroids.  Upon close examination, Patton, who had seen many butts in
his days in the horse calvary, exclaimed "what the fuck joe."  CPT Abe
Baum his S3 took the mission instead.  Baum received his orders at
1700 on 26 March, 1945 and prepared to move out at midnight.

The mission had some unusual aspects.  After the raid started, 3rd
Army would continue north, leaving TF Baum in 7th Army's AO.
Additionally, there was no reserve and dedicated air support was
limited to one propeller plane to relay messages.  After 10 miles they
would be out of range artillery.

Baum quickly assembled his task force, hand-picking Companies and
support elements.  He specifically request TSGT Graham.  Because some
other company was short on dudes he used Alpha and fuck-face
company???

TODO: Insert task org here

Abrams used his TODO companies to clear a route through Schweinhein
for Task Force Baum.  The artillery barrage began at 2030.  The men
suffered greatly, naming the town "bazooka city".  At 2330, Baum told
his men "we'll leave when I return from the front."  After a brief
scouting mission, TF Baum rolled through Schweinheim, finally
beginning their mission at 0030 on 27 March.

Berlin (german Army HQ name?) was notified of the breach thirty
minutes later.  Some nazin thought Patton had spotted the German weak
point in their defense, so they directed two divisions to reinforce
the breach.

Baum reached his first objective at 0230, reaching highway 26 at the
town of Laufach.  Along the route, Baum directed his medium tanks to
knock down the telephone poles.  Once the telephone poles were felled,
Baum directed his infantry to dismount and cut the wires to ensure the
job was done.

Baum's convoy streched over a mile and traveled at 15 miles per hour
due to black-out conditions.  They reached the town of Lohr at TODO?
GENTODO Obstfelder, commander of German's 19th Army stationed his
headquarters at Lohr.  Baum continued to his objective, unaware of the
prize before him.  Along the route, Baum directed his medium tanks to
knock down the telephone poles.  Once the telephone poles were felled,
Baum directed his infantry to dismount and cut the wires to ensure the
job was done.

Baum's convoy streched over a mile and traveled at 15 miles per hour
due to black-out conditions.  They reached the town of Lohr at TODO?
GENTODO Obstfelder, commander of German's 19th Army stationed his
headquarters at Lohr.  Baum continued to his objective, unaware of the
prize before him.  Along the route, Baum directed his medium tanks to
knock down the telephone poles.  Once the telephone poles were felled,
Baum directed his infantry to dismount and cut the wires to ensure the
job was done.

Baum's convoy streched over a mile and traveled at 15 miles per hour
due to black-out conditions.  They reached the town of Lohr at TODO?
GENTODO Obstfelder, commander of German's 19th Army stationed his
headquarters at Lohr.  Baum continued to his objective, unaware of the
prize before him.  Along the route, Baum directed his medium tanks to
knock down the telephone poles.  Once the telephone poles were felled,
Baum directed his infantry to dismount and cut the wires to ensure the
job was done.

Baum's convoy streched over a mile and traveled at 15 miles per hour
due to black-out conditions.  They reached the town of Lohr at TODO?
GENTODO Obstfelder, commander of German's 19th Army stationed his
headquarters at Lohr.  Baum continued to his objective, unaware of the
prize before him.  Along the route, Baum directed his medium tanks to
knock down the telephone poles.  Once the telephone poles were felled,
Baum directed his infantry to dismount and cut the wires to ensure the
job was done.

Baum's convoy streched over a mile and traveled at 15 miles per hour
due to black-out conditions.  They reached the town of Lohr at TODO?
GENTODO Obstfelder, commander of German's 19th Army stationed his
headquarters at Lohr.  Baum continued to his objective, unaware of the
prize before him.  Along the route, Baum directed his medium tanks to
knock down the telephone poles.  Once the telephone poles were felled,
Baum directed his infantry to dismount and cut the wires to ensure the
job was done.

Baum's convoy streched over a mile and traveled at 15 miles per hour
due to black-out conditions.  They reached the town of Lohr at TODO?
GENTODO Obstfelder, commander of German's 19th Army stationed his
headquarters at Lohr.  Baum continued to his objective, unaware of the
prize before him.  Along the route, Baum directed his medium tanks to
knock down the telephone poles.  Once the telephone poles were felled,
Baum directed his infantry to dismount and cut the wires to ensure the
job was done.

Baum's convoy streched over a mile and traveled at 15 miles per hour
due to black-out conditions.  They reached the town of Lohr at TODO?
GENTODO Obstfelder, commander of German's 19th Army stationed his
headquarters at Lohr.  Baum continued to his objective, unaware of the
prize before him.  Along the route, Baum directed his medium tanks to
knock down the telephone poles.  Once the telephone poles were felled,
Baum directed his infantry to dismount and cut the wires to ensure the
job was done.

Baum's convoy streched over a mile and traveled at 15 miles per hour
due to black-out conditions.  They reached the town of Lohr at TODO?
GENTODO Obstfelder, commander of German's 19th Army stationed his
headquarters at Lohr.  Baum continued to his objective, unaware of the
prize before him.  They took their first casualty outside Lohr.  One
Sherman was disabled from a Panzerfoust.  The crew scrambled to other
vehicles and TF Baum continued.

German General, Lotz told everything

Baum planned to cross the Sinn River at Gemünden.  After enetering the
town they took heavy losses, losing 3TODO tanks to heavy fire.  Baum
returned to Langenprozelten to look for another crossing in the North.
As soon as the convoy started, the lead tank knocked a German Soldier
motorcyle rider off his bike.  After tactical questioning, Baum
discovered that the soldier was a Paratrooper that deserted from the
Eastern front to see his wife and newborn boy TODO: verify.  Baum took
the time to draw his knife and begin an elaborate sharpening routine
and genlty asked the Paratrooper the location of the next bridge.  The
Paratrooper quickly told the task force of a bridge at Burgsinn.  The
task force then moved out north.  The Paratrooper proved valuable,
coaxing several squads of Germans from hiding, exclaiming the
"American's are here".  Sotoloff, Baum's American translator helpfully
provided that it's better to surrender to Americans than Russians.

Task Force made quick progress towards Burgsinn, crossing the Sinn
River and continuing East to Graäfendorf, arriving just before 1300.
Upon cresting a hill, the task force stumbled upon 700 Russian POWs
guarded by 200 Germans.  Upon liberation, one Russian immediately gave
chase to one of the guards, tightly clenching a knife.  The Red Army
soldiers found a nearby liquor warehouse to celebrate their good
fortune.  Shortly after liberating the Russians, Baum notice a German
spotter plane near Weickersgruben.

Shortly afterwards, Baum spotted a German reconnaissance plane at
Weickersgruben

Koehl, a cool dude, recieved orders to move 20 miles and stop the cony




\newpage

Bibliography
============

<!-- pandoc-citeproc processes citations and inserts the completed -->
<!-- text into the .tex file.  So, when using pandoc-citeproce, -->
<!-- citations are included as part of the body. To prevent -->
<!-- double-spacing our Bibliography, we need the raw latex command -->
<!-- here.  Pandoc preserves raw latex commands.  Github issue filed: -->
<!-- https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/issues/1376 -->

\RaggedRight
\setlength{\RaggedRightParindent}{1.5em}
\setlength{\parindent}{1.5em}
\setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}
\singlespacing

<!--
   \bibliography{dummy, somalia.bib}
   Local Variables:
   reftex-default-bibliography: ("somalia.bib")
   zotero-collection: #("1" 0 1 (name "Somalia"))
   reftex-cite-format: ((?\C-m . "[@%l]"))
   End:
-->
